---
title: Rains, Thieves and Broken Dreams
date: 2015-01-15 06:52:00 -05:00
layout: post
---

Unlike most of India that receives rains once, Kerala has two rounds of monsoons. The first of the season arrives in June when the advancing monsoons make bountiful our harvest and rake up our GDP numbers. The brief spell of unperturbed sunlight is broken by the retreating monsoons, popularly called ‘Thulavarsham’ for they occur in the month of October/’Thula’, taking their leave from the country having toured thoroughly. Palghat being the gap between the Nilgiris is a recipient of copious rains on both occasions, as much awaited winds arrive and depart through the mountains. One such rainy night, I was thirteen and peacefully asleep in my parents’ room after a stubborn protest to sleep with them. My mom’s subtle coercions had failed. ‘You can not sleep with your brother and his wife, you can’t with your mom and dad, but you can, with your grandmother or with your grandmother and grandfather’. Sure, I am a girl from rural Palghat, who didn’t even know what boyfriend meant at that age, and I wasn’t going to take any of that.

At night, the sound of the rain pounding on the asbestos sheets often muffles the cries by frogs and crickets, who waits eagerly to showcase their effervescent chorus as soon as the rains drain. In the days of my childhood, thieves were common in our locality. The luscious jackfruits that hung from the tree my mom carefully grooms always get stolen. She laughs at us. You see, my reader, she was born and brought up in Thrissur, in a more prosperous household and locality, where she says jackfruits fall to the ground and crack, to lie there and rot with their guts splattered out. In comparison, my dad and his family belongs to Palakkad, which is factually underdeveloped than Thrissur. The four of us and our dad( since by patriarchy we kids belong to Palghat and lived there forever) would never admit that, leading to vicious clashes between team Thrissur, composed of my mom and team Palakkad, the rest of us. This led to endless winding arguments during similarly endless and winding car drives, where our mimicry of the oblique Thrissur accented ‘Enthutta??’ met with her condescending retorts of ‘Palakkad-Pattikkad’( Pattikad translates literally to bitch-forest, nevertheless a real place).

Monsoons are also the time when trade bustles for local thieves, as the roar and clatter of the incessantly boisterous rains form the ideal camouflage for their covert businesses. One night, my mom, who had fallen asleep on the couch watching TV, was walking to her bedroom at 1am, found the bars of the hall window reflected on the door on the opposite wall. Having dismissed it as the friendly Kaladharan uncle looking around with his torch( those days, lol), she was shocked to see a man wearing a hat move in the car porch. Quietly slipping to the bedroom, she alerted my dad who walked up to the room we call ‘varkerea’( a mallu adaption of ‘work area’) to find a man peeping from the corner of the grilled and netted(because mosquitoes) wall. Now, my dad may be a whipped husband, like most South Indian husbands, having little say in household matters. Even more so, because his wife earns more than him and her fiscally prudent and industrious investments in land and gold compared to his risk averse fixed deposits and low yield government bonds have let her eclipse him in wealth and subsequently, decisions of the kids and the household. But that day, he was a brave man; put on his shirt, grabbed an iron rod in tranquil resolution and stepped out of the house despite our horrified pleadings and my mom physically blocking him. 
During another instance, an eccentric thief visited Archana chechi’s house every thursday, and pooped on their clothes hanging out. The neighbours, anticipating him on a subsequent thursday, laid wait and chased him across the open fields behind our colony. That was his last visit. A different thief broke into Ammu and Appu’s house by removing the door while their house was under reconstruction, and stole everything in the lower floor knowing fully well they were blissfully sleeping upstairs. It got so bad that at one instance, the police brought a criminal who was charged with murdering a housewife in Northern Calicut and the whole colony watched as he dug out the weapon and ornaments of the victim from Athira chechi’s backyard, along with her mother’s gold anklet which had been missing for a while. 

Marred by these incidents, we were always on the alert for thieves, especially during the rainy days. After launching that staunch protest, and threatening a full scale civil disobedience movement inspired from the 8th standard history textbook, I was allowed to sleep with my parents. In the middle of the night, we woke up to the screams of my grandmother, who slept across the hall with my three sisters. She was howling and wailing, in high pitched groans of ‘Ayyo…’ and as we woke up wide eyed in shock and scurried to her room with petrified faces, we were sure she was being robbed. Amma and I ran to her and switched on the lights, while my dad sat up in his bed, rubbing his droopy eyes. She was lying in her bed, squirming with eyes closed while my mother shook her violently. She sat up and half asleep, explained to us how she had her social studies board exam the next day and being severely underprepared with loads to study, was headed to a near-definite failure. Having made sure there were no robbers in the room, my mom pointed it out to her that she was not a 15 year old tenth standard student, but a 73 year old grandmother of 9! After calming down, my Grandmother went to sleep. Amma made me some warm milk and we went to sleep to resume our own dreams, amused. I guess these dreams that come to me today, of being worried about exams, finding myself naked in school grounds and staring into the mouth of a roaring giant lion that came alive from a loose pile of sand during a failed mission to save the princess, will haunt me even as my hair turns grey and face grows saggy. Sleep well, you too, my reader!

:)
